Hugging Face, Inc.
20 Jay Street, Suite 620,
Brooklyn, NY 11201
Hugging Face Response to the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration
Request for Comments on Dual Use Foundation Artificial
Intelligence Models with Widely Available Model Weights
Hugging Face applauds the ongoing work of the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA) in examining dual use foundation models (FMs). The following comments are
informed by our experiences as an open platform for AI systems, working to make AI accessible
and broadly available to researchers for responsible development.
About Hugging Face
Hugging Face is a community-oriented company based in the U.S. and France working to
democratize good Machine Learning (ML), and has become the most widely used platform for
sharing and collaborating on ML systems. We are an open-source and open-science platform
hosting machine learning models and datasets within an infrastructure that supports easily
processing and analyzing them; conducting novel AI research; and providing educational resources,
courses, and tooling to lower the barrier for all backgrounds to contribute to AI.
Questions
In order to best address the risks and benefits of widely available model weights, we explore
both the dimension of wide availability of a model and access to model weights in our responses
to avoid conflating risks inherent in the technology with risks associated with release methods.
We refer to models with widely available model weights as “open-weight models”.
1. How should NTIA define “open” or “widely available” when thinking about
foundation models and model weights?
Both “open” and “widely available” as terms are distinct, and require appropriate definitions
when discussing risks and benefits.
“Open” should consider components that shape model impact. The risks and benefits of
foundation models are shaped by decision along their development and deployment chain (e.g.
when considering risks of biases and discriminatory outcomes1). The contribution of openness
1 Let's talk about biases in machine learning! Ethics and Society Newsletter #2
Page 1
to supporting beneficial development of the technology,2 as well as the governance processes it
requires to help mitigate risks of the technology, will depend on access and transparency into
not just the model weights but also its development datasets3, development conditions,4 and
deployment infrastructure.
Open weights for a foundation model are notable on two main accounts. First, given how
resource-intensive the data curation and training of the models has become, sharing this
particular artifact in the AI value chain is necessary to enable downstream research that only
requires model access from many stakeholders outside of well-resourced companies.5 Second,
the release of a model’s weights has historically served as a catalyst for development projects
that prioritize overall transparency6 and proactive consideration of regulatory processes7 that
enable more comprehensive research on risks and benefits along the development chain.
To account for all those dynamics, we strongly recommend considering at least three main
components in FM openness: its datasets, the trained model, and the model’s training and
deployment mechanisms.
“Widely available” should consider breadth (not just scale) of access. In general, providing
model access to a more diverse set of stakeholders can have a net positive impact on the safety
of the technology; access should be available to stakeholders who are best positioned to
identify risks and limitations8 – and particularly to third-party organizations that do not have a
direct relationship (or conflicts of interest) with the developer and direct beneficiaries.9 Breadth
of access can be achieved independently of scale through mechanisms such as gating, where
access is granted by an (independent) organization for specific well-motivated research and
development projects.10 Simple availability is also distinct from accessibility; model weights
being available may not be accessible to people without the necessary compute infrastructure
or skill set for model hosting. For uses of a model that do not require specific customization, a
managed API supported by extensive computational resources greatly increases the scale of
availability independently of whether model weights are directly accessible.
a. Is there evidence or historical examples suggesting that weights of models similar to
currently-closed AI systems will, or will not, likely become widely available? If so, what are they?
Past examples include staged releases of model weights where closed weights are released
over time, as seen with OpenAI’s GPT-211, Meta’s LLaMA12, and Stability AI’s Stable Diffusion13.
All recent prominent closed models have been followed by an open comparable alternative.
13 Stable Diffusion Public Release — Stability AI
12 Introducing LLaMA: A foundational, 65-billion-parameter large language model
11 Release Strategies and the Social Impacts of Language Models
10 Access form for the BigScience training corpus
9 Outsider Oversight: Designing a Third Party Audit Ecosystem for AI Governance
8 A Safe Harbor for Independent AI Evaluation
7 Do Foundation Model Providers Comply with the Draft EU AI Act?
6 Introducing The Foundation Model Transparency Index
5 The Compute Divide in Machine Learning: A Threat to Academic Contribution and Scrutiny?
4 The BigCode Project Governance Card
3 Policy Questions Blog 1: AI Data Transparency Remarks for NAIAC Panel 📚
2 AI Policy @🤗: Open ML Considerations in the EU AI Act
Page 2
Examples include OpenAI’s GPT-3 deployed via API in 2021 and model weights for
BigScience’s BLOOM and Meta’s OPT both released in 2022. Recently, DataBricks was
reported to have trained a competitive large language model for 10M$, significantly lower than
the initial development cost of closed products;14 indicating that relying on cost or trade secrets
is unlikely to limit availability of top-performing models to their current set of developers.
Being “first to market” presents a strong economic competitive advantage for closed systems,
and reproduction efforts of the model itself are motivated by a range of values, including
scientific understanding, free and open source software (FOSS) ideals of accessibility, and
customization, including fitness for purpose and harm mitigation strategies.15
b. Is it possible to generally estimate the timeframe between the deployment of a closed model
and the deployment of an open foundation model of similar performance on relevant tasks?
How do you expect that timeframe to change? Based on what variables? How do you expect
those variables to change in the coming months and years?
Timelines vary and estimates will change by utility of the model and costs. Factors include
computational cost, training data accessibility, and potential anti-competitive practices from
original developers. Research focus and more compute and data-efficient algorithms are
advantages for open models, whereas product focus, data concentration, high resources, and
legally untested or contested practices are advantages for close development. Overall, socially
responsible research in open reproduction of closed models will necessarily take more time for
release16 as legal and ethical concerns are addressed proactively rather than retroactively after
issues have been observed at sufficient scale.
c. Should “wide availability” of model weights be defined by level of distribution? If so, at what
level of distribution (e.g., 10,000 entities; 1 million entities; open publication; etc.) should model
weights be presumed to be “widely available”? If not, how should NTIA define “wide
availability?”?
Model weights can be shared individually between parties, on platforms with or without
documentation and with or without access management, and via p2p/torrent. Usability depends
on resources and infrastructure; subsidized compute from cloud compute providers can
increase access drastically, including for uses that go against the spirit of ToU but are hard to
detect. APIs can broaden model availability, even to malicious actors, especially already relying
on developer infrastructure. APIs also can be attacked to provide model information17. Even
controlled risks can outweigh open models in magnitude through deployment scale.18
18 Google's Bard AI chatbot is vulnerable to use by hackers. So is ChatGPT.
17 Stealing Part of a Production Language Model
16 BigScience: A Case Study in the Social Construction of a Multilingual Large Language Model
15 Policy Readout - Columbia Convening on Openness and AI
14 Inside the Creation of DBRX, the World's Most Powerful Open Source AI Model | WIRED
Page 3
d. Do certain forms of access to an open foundation model (web applications, Application
Programming Interfaces (API), local hosting, edge deployment) provide more or less benefit or
more or less risk than others? Are these risks dependent on other details of the system or
application enabling access? i. Are there promising prospective forms or modes of access that
could strike a more favorable benefit-risk balance? If so, what are they?
There is no standard for weighing risks and benefits, nor are there standards or clear
methods for definitive access decisions. Distributed methods for sharing via torrent are
arising such as tweeting magnet links as seen with xAI’s Grok19. These are broadly accessible
but do not allow for updates in information and rely on trust and robustness of the torrent sharer.
Web applications with user interfaces lower the barrier for users with little to no AI experience to
engage with the model. Functionality depends on application and interface, such as the ability to
toggle temperature. This is often surface-level access, and cannot be built upon.
API deployment can offer varying functionality, allowing only querying or allowing fine-tuning.
APIs ease use for prescribed use cases as they only require internet connection and possibly a
user account. APIs are often commercialized. Deployment benefits include monitoring, last-layer
interventions, rate-limiting. Limitations include research and auditing inaccessibility, privacy
concerns, and infrastructural reliability issues. API terms of use can be monitored and detected,
and users can be blocked or revoked access. However content moderation proves difficult;
blocks can easily be bypassed; false positives can block good faith researchers.20 Last-layer
interventions include watermarks after output generation. Limited API access makes research
less reliable or presents additional barriers when limiting access to logits, forcing version
changes, or obfuscating input and output processing that confound research findings. API
deployment also introduces additional privacy challenges when user inputs are collected. APIs
also entirely rely on a model hoster and their infrastructure, which may have significant demand
and varying reliability.
Platform sharing of model weights enables broad access to models for local use and
modification, controlled by access management (e.g. gating) and visibility (privacy, sensitive
content tags) features. Content guidelines and ToU on model sharing platforms are defined at
the model rather than at the use level. Releases on platforms can range from fully permissive to
research-only (e.g. Cohere Command-R21).
Local hosting provides full control of the model and inputs to the model, satiates any privacy and
sensitive information concerns, and opens many possible research directions. However, this is
less monitorable for the deployer, should the user break terms of use. Edge deployment is a
type of local hosting that has environment, portability, and privacy benefits.
21 Command R
20 A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming
19 Grok model release via torrent on the X platform
Page 4
2. How do the risks associated with making model weights widely available
compare to the risks associated with non-public model weights?
a. What, if any, are the risks associated with widely available model weights? How do these
risks change, if at all, when the training data or source code associated with fine tuning,
pretraining, or deploying a model is simultaneously widely available?
In most cases, the risks associated with open-weight models are broadly similar to any other
part of a software system (with or without AI components), and are similarly
context-dependent.2223 Risks should also be weighed against non-AI systems.24 Prominent
considerations include new capabilities and systems designed specifically for harm.
New AI use cases arise fast, as seen with the easy creation of photo-realistic images enabled
by diffusion models, and more recently video and audio generations. Accelerated development
timelines can outpace societal and technical interventions. Both closed development and
large-scale release with rapid distribution contribute to risks arising and timeline considerations.
Open development often provides additional time and opportunities to question choices,
allowing many perspectives to shape systems earlier design decisions25. Conversely, closed
product development followed by rapid distribution can lead to significant disruptions in
important sectors for sometimes uncertain benefits.2627 Rapid distribution depends on a
combination of the availability of model weights, cost and technical difficulty of running a model,
availability of a product or API version of an AI system, and broad advertisement and
awareness of the AI system. Ensuring that scientific understanding of foundation models and
development of new applications of the technology is more gradual helps identify issues and
understand technological impacts earlier.
AI systems that are designed specifically for harmful uses, such as harassment or NCII, present
distinct challenges from AI systems with dual use risks. Such models should most aptly be
compared to malware in the context of traditional software.28 On model sharing platforms, such
models are subject to moderation following content policies.29 Providing explicit guidance on
categories of misuse and learning from existing mechanisms of platform governance to promote
cybersecurity will be essential to managing those risks. In some cases, broadly useful models
can be fine-tuned or adapted to specifically re-purpose them for such harmful uses. Safety by
design practices can address those risks, for example limiting the prevalence of data that would
make the models easier to misuse in general pre-training30 or researching new methods for
30 StarCoder 2 and The Stack v2: The Next Generation; developers opted to remove known malware from pre-training data to make
it harder to fine-tune for misuse
29 Content Policy – Hugging Face
28 Malware, Phishing, and Ransomware | Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency CISA
27 The impact of ChatGPT on higher education
26 College professors are in 'full-on crisis mode' as they catch one 'ChatGPT plagiarist' after another
25 Deconstructing Design Decisions: Why Courts Must Interrogate Machine Learning and Other Technologies
24 On the Societal Impact of Open Foundation Models
23 Artificial Intelligence | CISA
22 Open Source Software Security | CISA
Page 5
securing models at the weights level31. Additionally, fine-tuning models still requires collating
datasets of harmful uses; limiting access to those represents another important layer of risk
mitigation.
Taking action after a model release when new risks are identified presents distinct challenges
and opportunities for closed and open weights models. API access models can be deleted
either voluntarily by the deployer or by court request when found to be in breach of existing
regulation,32 but the cost of doing so when they are tightly integrated in a widely used
commercial product may disincentivize organizations from taking actions, and internal scrutiny
may not always be sufficient.33 Conversely, good platform governance can more flexibly provide
warnings and documentation, switch adoption to safer models, add technical access
management such as gating, and remove models that violate platform policy; drastically
reducing availability as a risk mitigation strategy.34
For models shared through peer-to-peer systems such as torrents, updates or removals will
often rely on alternative communication channels and interventions in deployed contexts.
Releasing training and especially evaluation and testing datasets is usually a net positive
from a risk perspective. Information about how a model was trained, where its data may
present risks, what mitigation strategies were adopted, and how it was tested, can help to
identify model vulnerabilities or limitations and conduct risk-benefit analyses. Challenges include
intellectual property and privacy of data subjects. We note several approaches available to
effectively manage these tensions35.
b. Could open foundation models reduce equity in rights and safety-impacting AI systems (e.g.
healthcare, education, criminal justice, housing, online platforms, etc.)?
Maximally open systems, including training data, weights, and evaluation protocol, can
aid in identifying flaws and biases. Insufficient documentation can reduce effectiveness.36 To
maximize benefits, we recommend developers maintain up-to-date information about systems
and publicly disclose biases and vulnerabilities as they are identified. The Hugging Face Hub
platform supports a collaborative approach to model documentation.37 We encourage adopters
to maintain an inventory of which open systems they are using to help understand relevant risks
to study and document. An example could be an inventory of systems used in the federal
government.38
38 Hugging Face Response to OMB RFC on federal use of AI
37 Model Cards - Hugging Face
36 Black-Box Access is Insufficient for Rigorous AI Audits
35 📚Training Data Transparency in AI: Tools, Trends, and Policy Recommendations 🗳️
34 Content Policy – Hugging Face
33 Microsoft engineer sounds alarm on company's AI image generator in letter to FTC
32 FTC settlement includes removal of trained facial recognition model
31 Self-Destructing Models: Increasing the Costs of Harmful Dual Uses of Foundation Models
Page 6
c. What, if any, risks related to privacy could result from the wide availability of model weights?
Research has shown trained models can regurgitate private information from their pre-training.
This is a sign of improperly trained models, and the behavior is difficult to predict. Weight
availability can marginally exacerbate attacks, but is rarely the most efficient method. Model
memorization is highly dependent on the model architecture, size, and training procedure.394041
Mitigations include proper data governance and management practices during training.42 Open
development has exemplified these practices, including via privacy-conscious data sourcing
(e.g. BigScience43), and developing pseudonymization and personal data redaction methods for
the training data domain (e.g. the StarCoder44). Privacy risks tied to the use of foundation
models chiefly arise from API deployment settings that store user data,45 however, which
open-weights models can help mitigate (see our answer to 3b below).
d. Are there novel ways that state or non-state actors could use widely available model weights
to create or exacerbate security risks, including but not limited to threats to infrastructure, public
health, human and civil rights, democracy, defense, and the economy?
Open-weight models are unnecessary for state actor threats; should state actors prefer to use
FMs, they likely would prefer to build their own capabilities.46 Narrow AI systems are more
tailorable to a given threat. Models with realistic outputs are expensive to use, often more
so than human alternatives or narrower systems. For example, the costs of human and AI
generated disinformation do not always favor large language model (LLM) use.47
All existing models exacerbate risks given the following conditions: models introduce a new
attack vector48; models reduce the overall cost of attack through generation or distribution49;
malicious actors are unable to build a tailored model. When closed-weight models allow higher
scale of use via free or compute-subsidized access, relative risks should be reevaluated.
Open-weight model risks can outweigh those of APIs when the following additional
conditions are met: models need fine-tuning in ways unavailable via API; malicious content can
easily be automatically identified as malicious (e.g. generated outputs for malware creation or
legitimate software50); safeguards are robust to basic evasion (e.g. “jailbreaking”51 or traditional
content moderation evasion techniques52).
52 Microsoft CEO responds to AI-generated Taylor Swift fake nude images
51 [2307.15043] Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models
50 Incident 443: ChatGPT Abused to Develop Malicious Softwares
49 The criminal use of ChatGPT – a cautionary tale about large language models | Europol
48 Google's Bard AI chatbot is vulnerable to use by hackers. So is ChatGPT.
47 How Much Money Could Large Language Models Save Propagandists? | Center for Security and Emerging Technology
46 Yi-34B, Llama 2, and common practices in LLM training: a fact check of the New York Times | EleutherAI Blog
45 AIDB: ChatGPT Banned by Italian Authority Due to OpenAI's Lack of Legal Basis for Data Collection and Age Verification
44 StarCoder: may the source be with you!
43 Documenting Geographically and Contextually Diverse Data Sources: The BigScience Catalogue of Language Data and
Resources
42 https://github.com/allenai/fm-cheatsheet/blob/main/app/resources/paper.pdf
41 Understanding and Mitigating Copying in Diffusion Models
40 Extracting Training Data from Diffusion Models
39 Quantifying Memorization Across Neural Language Models
Page 7
e. What, if any, risks could result from differences in access to widely available models across
different jurisdictions?
Cross-jurisdictional legal uncertainty can be detrimental to research collaborations that span
sectors, organizations, and geographies. This includes liability per contributor, IP and copyright
law, and foundational laws around digital privacy and regulation of misuses such as CSAM.
f. Which are the most severe, and which the most likely risks described in answering the
questions above? How do these set of risks relate to each other, if at all?
In terms of novelty and scalability of the application, disparate impact of openness, and severity
of the harms, non-consensual intimate imagery (NCII) in static images and videos remains the
most serious and pressing risk factor of new FMs. Openness, including access to training
datasets and training code, aids mitigation by enabling external scrutiny through investigating
the highest contributor factors (especially at the dataset level53) and enabling safety by design.
Marginal risk for open-weight models is less certain for pressing risks such as nonconsensual
voice cloning; hosted models can be equally harmful54 with little recourse. The most concerning
models fall well below proposed thresholds for dual use, and can easily be independently
trained from scratch by medium-resourced actors. Effective policy action should target use
cases and provide guidelines for all models across availability.
3. What are the benefits of foundation models with model weights that are widely
available as compared to fully closed models?
a. What benefits do open model weights offer for competition and innovation, both in the AI
marketplace and in other areas of the economy? In what ways can open dual-use foundation
models enable or enhance scientific research, as well as education/training in computer science
and related fields?
Open-weight models contribute to competition, innovation, and broad understanding of AI
systems to support effective and reliable development. In terms of value creation of open
technology, the historical and economic impact of Open Source Software (OSS) provides
important context for the expected impact of open-weight models. Two main phenomena bear
strong relevance: First, the estimated demand-side value of OSS is several orders of magnitude
larger ($8.8 trillion) than its supply-side value (>$4 billion).55 Investment in open technology pays
off over 1000x in value in other areas of the economy. Second, adoption enables users to
reallocate resources to internal development that supports market diversification and
sustainable self-driven growth56, which is critical for start-ups and SMEs. OSS trades off capital
for human expertise. Recent work has shown that these dynamics are extending to AI;
56 Open Source Software and Global Entrepreneurship
55 The Value of Open Source Software
54 AI Startup ElevenLabs Bans Account Blamed for Biden Audio Deepfake - Bloomberg
53 Multimodal datasets: misogyny, pornography, and malignant stereotypes
Page 8
cost efficiency and customizability increasingly outweigh managed solutions, given
sufficient company expertise.57
Open-weight models are particularly relevant to mitigating market concentration at the data
level. High-quality data, both in the form of licensed content,5859 interaction data, and data
uploaded by customers of managed systems, is shaping up to be the next most likely point of
monopoly behaviors as training compute costs decrease (see our answer to Q1.a). Open
weights models increase the diversity of product offerings from providers and even enable
adopters to manage their own on-premise solutions. Companies using open-weights models
or systems built on them are in a position to keep their own data value,60 preserve
privacy, and build consortia on their own terms as needed to support better technology
development for their applications without having to give up their intellectual property.61 This is
needed to sustain high-quality data creation and fair valuation of the data contribution to AI
systems. Additionally, open-weight models have been customized and adapted to run on a
greater variety of infrastructure, including individual GPUs and even CPUs, reducing points of
market concentration with cloud providers and reducing costs for procurement.6263
AI foundation models combine innovative ways of building AI systems–and most innovation
supporting recent AI product releases has come from open and academic research. For
example, the video generation system SORA builds on many public research contributions.64
Software behind development is largely open source (Pytorch, Tensorflow, HF libraries) and
development often requires access to the weights. More convenient65 and more secure66 weight
storage formats are developed on OSS settings, among many framework improvements. This
includes fine-tuning major LLMs and research breakthroughs such as model merging.67
Open-weight models’ role in enhancing existing scientific research is evident in works on topics
ranging from knowledge distillation68 to watermarking69. Robust innovation on both performance
and safety questions requires scientific rigor and scrutiny, which is enabled by openness and
external reproducibility70. Supporting that research requires sharing models to validate
findings and lower the barrier to entry for participation given the growing resource gap between
researchers in different institutions.71 Recent open-weights releases of foundation models from
AI system providers such as Cohere’s Command+R,72 Google’s Gemma,73 and OpenAI’s
Whisper 374, among others, represent a welcome contribution to this research.
74 Introducing Whisper, openai/whisper-large-v3 · Hugging Face
73 Gemma: Google introduces new state-of-the-art open models
72 Command R
71 The Compute Divide in Machine Learning: A Threat to Academic Contribution and Scrutiny?
70 EleutherAI: Going Beyond "Open Science" to "Science in the Open"
69 A Watermark for Large Language Models
68 Knowledge Distillation of Large Language Models
67 Evolving New Foundation Models: Unleashing the Power of Automating Model Development
66 GitHub - huggingface/safetensors: Simple, safe way to store and distribute tensors
65 GGUF model saving format
64 Sora Reference Papers - a fffiloni Collection
63 llamafile: bringing LLMs to the people, and to your own computer - Mozilla Innovations
62 GitHub - ggerganov/llama.cpp: LLM inference in C/C++
61 SILO Language Models: Isolating Legal Risk In a Nonparametric Datastore
60 Will StarCoder 2 Win Over Enterprises?
59 OpenAI In Talks With Dozens of Publishers to License Content - Bloomberg
58 Exclusive: Reddit in AI content licensing deal with Google | Reuters
57 16 Changes to the Way Enterprises Are Building and Buying Generative AI | Andreessen Horowitz
Page 9
Open Weights Models and Evaluation
The availability of open-weights foundation models is of particular importance to the
development of the robust and reliable evaluation ecosystem required to properly govern this
category of technology. Access to open-weights models serves several distinct purposes for
evaluation. First, some categories of evaluation require direct access to model weights.
Evaluation of a model’s environmental impact and energy consumption, for example, involves
running models on controlled hardware.75 Evaluating model memorization behaviors76 (related to
privacy and intellectual property concerns), covert biases,77 and data contamination78 all require
varying levels of access from output logits to model activations without additional input or
output processing that are not consistently available through API deployment.
Second, access to model weights makes research and development of new evaluations
significantly cheaper. Developing a new evaluation technique typically requires extensive
iteration on variations of a system. Being able to run a model locally in a controlled environment
makes this process significantly more efficient and cheaper, and has been instrumental for
example in our own work on developing bias evaluations in image generation settings before
applying them to commercial systems.79
Third, while model developers should be incentivized to thoroughly evaluate their models, their
incentives and priorities may be mis-aligned with those of external stakeholders,
especially when models are part of commercial product development. Developer-run
evaluations may underplay limitations and harms of a model – often without explicitly setting out
to do so; to address this, recent work has called for safe harbor regimes to enable external
research80, and outlined limitations of “black-box” access81 and auditing without sufficient
agency.82 Similarly, self-reported performance numbers on task can often be misleading or
over-represent a model’s suitability for use. Common issues that contribute to this phenomenon
include misleading evaluation framing83, choice of metrics (leading to different perceptions of
“emergen capabilities”84), rampant issues of inappropriate benchmark decontamination,8586 and
reporting results on different model versions than the ones deployed in products.87 Finally,
evaluations of foundation model applications in specific domains should be led by experts in
these domains rather than by model developers to best reflect the risks and benefits of AI
adoption.88
88 The Shaky Foundations of Foundation Models in Healthcare
87 An In-depth Look at Gemini's Language Abilities
86 Leak, Cheat, Repeat: Data Contamination and Evaluation Malpractices in Closed-Source LLMs
85 Investigating Data Contamination for Pre-training Language Models
84 Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models a Mirage?
83 GPT-4 and professional benchmarks: the wrong answer to the wrong question
82 AI auditing: The Broken Bus on the Road to AI Accountability
81 Black-Box Access is Insufficient for Rigorous AI Audits
80 A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming
79 Stable Bias: Analyzing Societal Representations in Diffusion Models
78 Membership Inference Attacks against Language Models via Neighbourhood Comparison - ACL Anthology
77 Dialect prejudice predicts AI decisions about people's character, employability, and criminality
76 Quantifying Memorization Across Neural Language Models
75 Power Hungry Processing: Watts Driving the Cost of AI Deployment?
Page 10
Fourth, results obtained through third-party use of a model’s managed API are unreliable
without extensive documentation of the model versions, processing steps, or risk mitigation
strategies. Model providers can change the underlying version of a model at any time,89 and do
not always disclose sufficient details about post-processing steps that might have an impact on
the results, such as automatic edition of prompts.90 This is particularly relevant since, regardless
of any intentional misrepresentation, commonly used evaluations have been shown to be
sensitive to specific implementation details that often require extensive evaluation to
characterize.9192
Access to open-weights models that are substantially similar to those used in commercial
products is thus necessary to support a robust evaluation ecosystem, both to guide further
development of the technology and to support the development of appropriate standards.
b. How can making model weights widely available improve the safety, security, and
trustworthiness of AI and the robustness of public preparedness against potential AI risks?
Open-weight models can help in identifying attacks before they can be leveraged at scale; for
example, recent work on “stealing” the last layer was developed with LLaMA 293. Research has
also found some adversarial attacks apply to open and closed models,94 flagging the need to
understand limitations of safety techniques. As discussed in 3a, reproducibility increases trust in
AI systems by ensuring scientific rigor. Replicable evaluations with full transparency of replicable
pieces can resolve misunderstandings or misleading comparisons.95 Deployers canalso update
models as needed, without being locked into hosted model contracts and agreements - which is
particularly relevant when model vulnerabilities are identified or when a plausibly more secure
model becomes available.
Prominent privacy concerns arise from API deployment and user data storage9697 and
training on user data that contains private information.98 This tendency is particularly concerning
as access to private information has been identified as a significantly stronger risk factor than
model capacity in some misinformation settings.99 Open-weight models can mitigate this risk
by enabling a more controlled deployment environment and obviating the need to send data to
third party organizations. Open practices can enable broader red-teaming and evaluation
practices focused on privacy that can help secure all models.100
100 Privacy risks in deployment: Introducing the Chatbot Guardrails Arena
99 On the Conversational Persuasiveness of Large Language Models: A Randomized Controlled Trial
98 "It's a Fair Game'', or Is It? Examining How Users Navigate Disclosure Risks and Benefits When Using LLM-Based
Conversational Agents
97 AI Incident database: Incident 513: ChatGPT Banned by Italian Authority Due to OpenAI's Lack of Legal Basis for Data Collection
and Age Verification
96 March 20 ChatGPT outage: Here’s what happened
95 What's going on with the Open LLM Leaderboard?
94 Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models
93 Stealing Part of a Production Language Model
92 Open LLM Leaderboard: DROP deep dive
91 What's going on with the Open LLM Leaderboard?
90 DALL·E 3
89 GPT-4 API general availability and deprecation of older models in the Completions API
Page 11
c. Could open model weights, and in particular the ability to retrain models, help advance equity
in rights and safety-impacting AI systems (e.g. healthcare, education, criminal justice, housing,
online platforms etc.)?
Yes; in addition to examples in 3a, LLaMA’s adaptation into Alpaca101 significantly eased
accessibility while maintaining high performance. Some API restrictions prevent
equity-advancing research.102 Open practices, such as open data work, can help address
historical biases and prevent “hate-scaling”.103
e. How do these benefits change, if at all, when the training data or the associated source code
of the model is simultaneously widely available?
Access to the training data of an open-weights foundation model provides substantial additional
benefits from the perspective of research, rights and governance, and safety.104 Direct access
top the training dataset can support research on model privacy and memorization,105 risks tied to
hate content106 or NCII generation107, intentional and unintentional impacts of data filtering
approaches108, among others. Interactive or managed access to a dataset can similarly help
answer questions about data provenance and privacy109 and support data governance centered
on the rights of data subjects.110 Support for projects that develop foundation models in fully
open settings by making both trained weights and access or extensive documentation of their
dataset available can enable more socially responsible and inclusive technology development.111
4. Are there other relevant components of open foundation models that, if
simultaneously widely available, would change the risks or benefits presented by
widely available model weights? If so, please list them and explain their impact.
In addition to examining artifacts listed in 1, often-overlooked artifacts include process and
documentation. Project governance shapes technical artifacts, including goals, trade-offs,
funding, and mechanisms for internal feedback. In fully open development, processes include
goal setting, value alignment, and enabling various stakeholders to question upstream choices.
The BigScience project provides this level of openness for a multilingual LLM,112 and the
BigCode project113 took a similar approach to develop a code LLM, including a new form of
Governance Card to report relevant information including funding, main development choices
and reasoning, handling of cybersecurity risks and personal data, and annotator pay for data
augmentation work.114
114 The BigCode Project Governance Card
113 BigCode Project
112 BigScience: A Case Study in the Social Construction of a Multilingual Large Language Model
111 Social Context of LLMs - the BigScience Approach, Part 3: Data Governance and Representation | Montreal AI Ethics Institute
110 Data Governance in the Age of Large-Scale Data-Driven Language Technology
109 The ROOTS Search Tool: Data Transparency for LLMs
108 A Pretrainer's Guide to Training Data: Measuring the Effects of Data Age, Domain Coverage, Quality, & Toxicity
107 Multimodal datasets: misogyny, pornography, and malignant stereotypes
106 On Hate Scaling Laws For Data-Swamps
105 How Much Do Language Models Copy From Their Training Data? Evaluating Linguistic Novelty in Text Generation Using RAVEN
104 📚Training Data Transparency in AI: Tools, Trends, and Policy Recommendations 🗳️
103 On Hate Scaling Laws For Data-Swamps
102 Dialect prejudice predicts AI decisions about people's character, employability, and criminality
101 Alpaca: A Strong, Replicable Instruction-Following Model
Page 12
Documentation approaches include model cards115 and datasheets116 that can be shared
broadly. Accompanying weights with information necessary to assess their usability for a given
use case helps ensure they are used in safer contexts. Data quality is broadly recognized to
directly affect ML system performance,117 and dataset limitations, such as toxicity and harmful
social biases, are typically reflected in a trained model.118 Datasets are often the most practical
artifact of study to understand the capabilities, risks, and limitations of a model. Sufficient
access to a training dataset119 can help answer relevant questions about a model’s
characteristics120.
5. What are the safety-related or broader technical issues involved in managing
risks and amplifying benefits of dual-use foundation models with widely available
model weights?
We need significantly more investment in evaluation to foster practices of safety, privacy, and
fairness by design. Results from reliable evaluation methodologies and design decisions such
as data selection can determine whether a model should be used, and in what conditions.
a. What model evaluations, if any, can help determine the risks or benefits associated with
making weights of a foundation model widely available?
Critical variables for assessing risks and benefits include type of model and design
process and data selection. Model evaluations are important in determining usability and use
case, and in shaping moderation decisions, but should be complemented with sufficient
documentation of both the development process and governance mechanisms (see responses
to 3e and 4) and the specific evaluation methodology (see response to 3a). Past moderation
decisions on Hugging Face about whether sharing specific models was consistent with our
terms of service has depended on all of those factors, as model evaluations by themselves can
fail to sufficiently address social dynamics and the context of use and development.
Models trained specifically for sensitive applications, such as identifying personal data (e.g. the
StarPII model121 used for private information redaction in the BigCode project training data) or
producing hate speech,122 require different governance and access to more specific
stakeholders. Processes for determining release method will differ by deployer organization and
calls for collective decision making boards are unanswered, although discourse is ongoing.123124
124 The Time Is Now to Develop Community Norms for the Release of Foundation Models
123 Publication Norms for Responsible AI - Partnership on AI
122 Handling and Presenting Harmful Text in NLP Research
121 StarPII release decision
120 The ROOTS Search Tool: Data Transparency for LLMs
119 📚Training Data Transparency in AI: Tools, Trends, and Policy Recommendations 🗳️
118 A Pretrainer's Guide to Training Data: Measuring the Effects of Data Age, Domain Coverage, Quality, & Toxicity
117 The Effects of Data Quality on Machine Learning Performance
116 Datasheets for Datasets
115 Model Cards for Model Reporting
Page 13
b. Are there effective ways to create safeguards around FMs, either to ensure that model
weights do not become available, or to protect system integrity or human well-being (including
privacy) and reduce security risks in those cases where weights are widely available?
Privacy by design includes steps throughout development including removing unnecessary
personal data from a training dataset (see BigScience and BigCode examples in 2c) and
following data minimization principles125 helps reduce risks described in 2c. However, privacy
risks also come from the extent to which current deployed systems encourage users to share
personal data during their interactions.126 Ensuring that the product design minimizes instances
where this information is stored or transmitted helps prevent damaging breaches.
Interventions at the fine-tuning level, such as in Constitutional AI or reinforcement learning with
human feedback to aid instruction following, can help steer a model towards more desirable
behaviors. While these interventions have an important role to play in adding friction to misuses
of models, they are also limited in their robustness and effectiveness127 and insufficient to
address fundamental issues with models.128129 Input and output monitoring can also be used to
automatically block queries that are incompatible with a model’s term of services. However,this
approach presents all of the familiar limitations and potential discriminate impacts of automatic
content moderation. In particular, the social cost of developing these safeguard datasets130 and
of live content moderation131 should be considered and minimized.
Model weight encryption is an ongoing research area, with proposals132 but no wide deployment.
c. What are the prospects for developing effective safeguards in the future?
In addition to building on 5b, safety by design, tight scoping of objectives, and intentional and
robust data curation all are paths forward. Using AI as safeguards on AI systems at the
deployment level may mitigate some risks, can easily compound biases and have
disproportionate impact on minority groups using the systems.133
d. Are there ways to regain control over and/or restrict access to and/or limit use of weights of
an open foundation model that, either inadvertently or purposely, have already become widely
available? What are the approximate costs of these methods today? How reliable are they?
Clearly defined platform governance frameworks and disclosure mechanisms can most
effectively limit availability for systems that require this guardrail due to vulnerabilities or
incompatibility with existing regulations. For models found to present critical vulnerabilities, AI
can draw on cybersecurity practices to notify users of updates. More research is needed to
133 Whose Language Counts as High Quality? Measuring Language Ideologies in Text Data Selection
132 NN-Lock: A Lightweight Authorization to Prevent IP Threats of Deep Learning Models | ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies
in Computing Systems
131 Inside Facebook's African Sweatshop | TIME
130 Inmates in Finland are training AI as part of prison labor - The Verge
129 The Male CEO and the Female Assistant: Probing Gender Biases in Text-To-Image Models Through Paired Stereotype Test
128 Dialect prejudice predicts AI decisions about people's character, employability, and criminality
127 Jailbreaking Black Box Large Language Models in Twenty Queries
126 "It's a Fair Game", or Is It? Examining How Users Navigate Disclosure Risks and Benefits When Using LLM-Based Conv
125 Artificial intelligence: the CNIL opens a consultation on the creation of datasets for AI
Page 14
scope what constitutes a critical vulnerability and to standardize evaluations. For models that
violate existing regulations or platform content policies, removal from the platform can help limit
their spread and mitigate their negative uses. On the Hugging Face platform, we have taken
actions to limit the use of models trained in a way that leads them to disproportionately produce
harassing text (e.g. GPT4chan134) or models that were trained to reproduce a person’s voice or
likeness without their consent.
e. What if any secure storage techniques or practices could be considered necessary to prevent
unintentional distribution of model weights?
Approaches can include a trusted research environment that provides researchers full access to
model components through an isolated virtual machine (e.g. HathiTrust Data Capsules135) to
ensure security, but are resource-intensive in terms of both computational and human support to
adapt the environment to specific research needs. FMs and LLMs are notably computationally
intensive. Public repositories with access management (such as Hugging Face gated
repositories136) can conveniently balance easy access for legitimate researchers and
stakeholders and limited release of model weights. In staged or gated releases, researchers
may enter legal agreements with terms of use including preventing model weight distribution.
f. Which components of a foundation model need to be available, and to whom, in order to
analyze, evaluate, certify, or red-team the model? To the extent possible, 14 please identify
specific evaluations or types of evaluations and the component(s) that need to be available for
each.
Different tasks and level of access needed per task may not be obvious just as risk landscapes
for dual-use FMs cannot be fully taxonomized at a given time. While this mapping exercise has
not and likely cannot be exhaustively conducted, some examples include bias evaluations listed
in 3a and Table 1 of the paper Black-Box Access is Insufficient for Rigorous AI Audits details
audit tasks and levels of access needed.137
g. Are there means by which to test or verify model weights? What methodology or
methodologies exist to audit model weights and/or foundation models?
Hugging Face has used a simple model hash to verify whether two models are the same item.
For open-weight models, verification is as simple as for any other large files. For APIs,
verification is significantly more complex given the stochastic nature of the outputs and complex
stack. As outlined above, this can be a source of security vulnerabilities for critical infrastructure
that relies on externally managed APIs.
137 [2401.14446] Black-Box Access is Insufficient for Rigorous AI Audits
136 Gated models
135 Data Capsules
134 ykilcher/gpt-4chan · Hugging Face
Page 15
7. What are current or potential voluntary, domestic regulatory, and international
mechanisms to manage the risks and maximize the benefits of foundation
models with widely available weights? What kind of entities should take a
leadership role across which features of governance?
a. What security, legal, or other measures can reasonably be employed to reliably prevent wide
availability of access to a foundation model’s weights, or limit their end use?
Popular measures include terms of licenses with use clauses138 and gating mechanisms in
addition to safeguards enumerated in recent work.139
b. How might the wide availability of open foundation model weights facilitate, or else frustrate,
government action in AI regulation?
As noted in 2, 3, and 5, wide availability of open foundation model weights facilitates
government action in AI regulation by supporting research on evaluation and standards,
fostering more transparent and accountable development, and promoting fair competition. As
noted in 2, governance of widely available open-weights models can also require different
interventions than API-only models, with different benefits and challenges.
c. When, if ever, should entities deploying AI disclose to users or the general public that they are
using open foundation models either with or without widely available weights?
Entities deploying AI systems should typically disclose that fact, as noted in the AI Bill of
Rights.140 In general, extending the concept of a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)141 to AI
systems, including identifying which versions of foundation models (open or closed) are being
used would have beneficial implications for cybersecurity and reliability.
d. What role, if any, should the U.S. government take in setting metrics for risk, creating
standards for best practices, and/or supporting or restricting the availability of foundation model
weights? i. Should other government or non-government bodies, currently existing or not,
support the government in this role? Should this vary by sector?
Evaluation presents two main challenges. First, specific risk evaluations is an open research
area, and risk priorities vary by organization. Evaluations as a field require significant
investment; widely used benchmarks for both performance and risks are criticized for often
providing insufficient or even misleading results.142 Second, model evaluation often depends on
the type of models evaluated and type of risk143, especially for topics like privacy risks. Continual
investment is needed to ensure evaluations reflect risks as models evolve. Sectoral contexts
improve metric robustness.
143 Evaluating the Social Impact of Generative AI Systems in Systems and Society
142 Dialect prejudice predicts AI decisions about people's character, employability, and criminality
141 Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) | CISA
140 Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights | OSTP | The White House
139 The Gradient of Generative AI Release: Methods and Considerations
138 OpenRAIL: Towards open and responsible AI licensing frameworks
Page 16
The U.S. government action can include establishing standards for best practices building on
existing work144 and prioritize requirements of safety by design across both the AI development
chain and its deployment environments.145 General conditions should treat models that are
broadly commercialized and broadly shared similarly. Actions should foster a research
ecosystem that has sufficient access to the artifacts and infrastructure to conduct
research, incentives to share lessons and artifacts for reproducibility, access to broad
subject matter experts including social scientists.
e. What should the role of model hosting services (e.g. HuggingFace, GitHub, etc.) be in making
dual-use models with open weights more or less available? Should hosting services host
models that do not meet certain safety standards? By whom should those standards be
prescribed? 16
At Hugging Face, use and utility are contextual. Our platform provides features for access
management to enable developers to tailor model availability and breadth of access to strike the
best balance between benefits and risks. We universally encourage extensive and transparent
documentation, mandating documentation for artifacts over 10,000 downloads and providing
guides and resources. Content guidelines146 address specific harms, including breach of
consent147 and use of models for intentional harm. Sharing platforms enable research on
systems that may serve different purposes, and in many cases purely as research artifacts.
f. Should there be different standards for government as opposed to private industry when it
comes to sharing model weights of open foundation models or contracting with companies who
use them?
Given its responsibility to stakeholders, the government should meet sufficient procurement
requirements to ensure accountability, rights-respecting deployment of technology, and to
ensure that AI adoption does provide a net benefit for considered use cases. We appreciate the
EO directive to do so and the work of the OMB in this direction.
g. What should the U.S. prioritize in working with other countries on this topic, and which
countries are most important to work with?
International collaboration is key, especially among U.S. allies such as the UK,
Singapore, and France. Vulnerability and security incident sharing is best raised among allies,
especially for those with dedicated AI bodies such as the U.S. and UK AI Safety Institutes.
International standards, including among countries with differing values and regulatory
approaches, are needed. An urgent need is disclosure standards, outlining what should be
disclosed broadly, which can be fine-tuned per jurisdiction to meet requirements for example in
147 Announcing our new Content Guidelines and Policy
146 Announcing our new Content Guidelines and Policy
145 Hugging Face Response to OMB RFC on federal use of AI
144 NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF)
Page 17
adhering to local laws. Evaluation standards can help build cross-cultural and multilingual
approaches to model safety.
h. What insights from other countries or other societal systems are most useful to consider?
Lessons can be drawn from the EU’s established AI Office, which maintains standards and
operational definitions as AI evolves, and is empowered to make case-by-case definitions about
which models might present a systemic risk to reflect the highly contextual nature of risk
assessments. The U.S. should designate an accountable organization for metrics, standards,
and requirements, and sufficiently resourcing them to keep pace with AI development. The
National Institute of Standards and Technology is well positioned and should be well resourced.
i. Are there effective mechanisms or procedures that can be used by the government or
companies to make decisions regarding an appropriate degree of availability of model weights
in a dual-use foundation model or the dual-use foundation model ecosystem? Are there
methods for making effective decisions about open AI deployment that balance both benefits
and risks? This may include responsible capability scaling policies, preparedness frameworks,
et cetera.
As discussed in 5a, no definitive processes or standards exist. In addition to discourse
referenced in 5a, ongoing cross-sectoral collaborations are sharing best practices.148 Strict
guidelines about safety by design processes can be helpful for developers as they have control
over relevant properties, including what data selection, whether the data covers high risk topics
such as nuclear devices, and whether the model is trained to produce malware. Limitations in
the state of evaluation development makes quantifying model behavior technically difficult.
As discussed in 5d, models that are trained specifically on PII/malware/hate speech may have
different release conditions. Non-regulatory practices such as vulnerability sharing can draw
from cybersecurity. In high risk settings, existing controls on information flow should apply.149
Narrow models for specific domains or applications should use practices from that domain.
j. Are there particular individuals/entities who should or should not have access to open-weight
foundation models? If so, why and under what circumstances?
Research institutions, especially those operating in public interest and outside of
commercial product development, should not only have access but also infrastructural
support. Government resourcing150 can not only provide financial and technical support, but
also ensure that researchers with sufficient breadth of expertise and external stakeholders have
access to technical artifacts that may be used in rights-impacting settings. As noted in 3a, third
party auditing is most effective when entities who can conditions without developer
engagement.151 Open-weight models can help create these conditions, along with varying
151 Outsider Oversight: Designing a Third Party Audit Ecosystem for AI Governance
150 National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Pilot | NSF
149 How AI Can Be Regulated Like Nuclear Energy
148 PAI's Deployment Guidance for Foundation Model Safety
Page 18
access to components such as datasets, including e.g. extensive documentation and query
access.152
8. In the face of continually changing technology, and given unforeseen risks and
benefits, how can governments, companies, and individuals make decisions or
plans today about open foundation models that will be useful in the future?
a. How should these potentially competing interests of innovation, competition, and security be
addressed or balanced?
Policy decisions can jointly advance interests of innovation, competition, and security. Work
across technological settings (e.g. in the contexts of election systems153 or biosecurity in protein
design154) has shown that a priori antagonistic goals can often both benefit from openness given
appropriately tailored approaches. In specific settings where the tensions are harder to resolve,
specificity in how these tensions are managed and narrowly tailored policies are particularly
important.155 Across both settings of widely available weights and API-only development,
extensive documentation, replicable evaluation, and transparency into design choices of
FMs all contribute positively to all of these interests.
b. Noting that E.O. 14110 grants the Secretary of Commerce the capacity to adapt the
threshold, is the amount of computational resources required to build a model, such as the
cutoff of 1026 integer or floating-point operations used in the 17 Executive Order, a useful metric
for thresholds to mitigate risk in the long-term, particularly for risks associated with wide
availability of model weights?
Concerns with thresholds include their robustness, purpose/trigger, enforcement, and
verifiability. Methods for determining and proxies for model capability have differing
effectiveness. Thresholds along any singular variable, such as training compute, will not
give robust insight to model capability and will adapt with time and incentives.
Additionally, while model evaluations should eventually play a major role in helping assess
proper use and governance of foundation models, our scientific understanding of these artifacts
and evaluation systems are not currently mature or robust enough to serve this purpose; and
will require significant additional investment and access to open models as outlined in our
response to 3a.
For determining what potential thresholds should trigger, we recommend starting with a
voluntary reporting framework. Rather than red-teaming results, disclosure should include what
replicable evaluations have been run, including on a spectrum of risks. This will build regulatory
capacity and foster a stronger evaluation ecosystem. Thresholds should not be singular
hardlines.156 Levels of mandates should apply by contextual use case and mode of
156 Drawing Lines: Tiers for Foundation Models
155 Openness versus Secrecy in Scientific Research Abstract - PMC
154 Protein design meets biosecurity | Science
153 Transparency versus security: early analysis of antagonistic requirements
152 📚Training Data Transparency in AI: Tools, Trends, and Policy Recommendations 🗳️
Page 19
deployment, whether in research or commercial applications. Robust transparency
requirements should apply to all commercial products.
Disclosure is critical and lessons can be drawn from cybersecurity to determining levels of
disclosure and what can be made public. Meeting a base level requirement should mandate
some level of disclosure. Models whose deployment is supported by extensive cloud compute
capacity, due to model size or volume of users, should warrant additional scrutiny including
cybersecurity audits given the scale of their impact. Robust documentation can also be
beneficial for commercial usability and trust.
Conclusion
AI innovation would not be possible without open access and open science. Openness broadly
continues to benefit the field. Since the AI field is a fast-evolving space with many arising
considerations, expanding scope to many system artifacts can help to better weigh risks and
benefits. Many risks apply across model weight availability and tailored threat models can
narrow intervention options. Hugging Face greatly appreciates the opportunity to provide
insights and we remain eager to support NTIA and provide our expertise moving forward.
Page 20
