 
 
 
 
 
 
March 27, 2024 
 
The Honorable Alan Davidson   
Administrator  
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA)  
1401 Constitution Ave, NW  
Washington, DC  20230  
 
Re: Request for Comment, National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 
Department of Commerce; Dual Use Foundation Artificial Intelligence Models Widely 
Available Model Weights (89 Fed. Reg. 14,059-14,063, February 26, 2024)  
Dear Administrator Davidson: 
 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce (“Chamber”) appreciates the opportunity to respond 
to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (“NTIA”) request for 
comment (“RFC”) on “Dual Use Foundation Artificial Intelligence Models with Widely Available 
Model Weights.” We agree with NTIA’s statement that “Artificial Intelligence (AI) has had, and 
will have, a significant effect on society, the economy, and scientific progress.1” Furthermore, 
we appreciate the RFC’s recognition of how open-source models “could play a key role in 
fostering growth among less resourced actors, helping to widely share access to AI’s 
benefits.”2  
 
The Chamber continues to be a strong advocate for using technology to assist small 
and medium businesses. A Chamber report released last year highlighted that 87%” of small 
businesses believe that technology platforms have helped their business operate more 
efficiently3 and that 71% of them plan to adopt the latest technology, including AI.4  
We remain concerned with the short comment period provided. Given the strategic 
importance of AI and its many associated technological and policy complexities, agencies 
must receive meaningful and robust public input to prevent ill-informed policy developments 
that could hinder the ability of Americans to reap the benefits of AI and maintain global 
leadership of this groundbreaking technology. Accordingly, the Chamber, with other 
associations, corresponded requesting a 60-day extension to allow stakeholders to provide 
the necessary and thoughtful comments.5  
 
 
1 89 Fed. Reg. 14060 available at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/02/26/2024-03763/dual-use-
foundation-artificial-intelligence-models-with-widely-available-model-weights#print.  
2 Id. 
3 Empowering Small Business: The Impact of Technology on U.S. Small Business at 3 (September 2023) available at  
https://www.uschamber.com/assets/documents/The-Impact-of-Technology-on-Small-Business-Report-2023-
Edition.pdf.  
4 Id.  
5Letter to NTIA (March 14, 2014) available at U.S. Chamber Multi-Association Comment Extension Request on 
NTIA's Dual Use Open Model RFI | U.S. Chamber of Commerce (uschamber.com).  
Unfortunately, that request for an extension was denied, and therefore, the business 
community can only provide limited feedback and comments. This denial will not provide the 
agency the benefit of robust feedback, and the denial will hamper the ability of the agency to 
assess and weigh the comments received. Accordingly, the agency is in danger of ignoring 
issues or data raised in the comment process. 
 
I. 
General Feedback  
  
Many benefits of open-source technology exist. Open-source technology allows 
developers to build, create, and innovate in various areas that will drive future economic 
growth. We already see innovation in marketing, communication, cybersecurity, and medicine, 
among other fields. Access model weights can be a boon to driving safety and security 
improvements to artificial intelligence by providing greater transparency, allowing flaws to be 
quickly identified and patched.6  
 
We would further highlight the need for NTIA to make decisions based on sound 
science and not unsubstantiated concerns that open models pose an increased risk to 
society.7  
 
Trust in technology is fundamental for society to embrace and use technology. For this 
reason, it is key to educate and prepare the American public through public-private 
partnerships. NTIA can help prepare the American public for a future in which AI is widely 
integrated throughout society and ensure that the United States has the necessary skilled 
workforce to benefit from the technology fully. We also further emphasize that the specific 
policy questions within the RFC are not just being asked within the United States but globally 
as well. NTIA must be mindful of the current geopolitical dialogue on this topic.  
 
II. 
Definitions .  
 
The Chamber believes it is critically important for NTIA not to deviate from the 
definition of the “dual-use foundation model” defined within Executive Order 14110.8 Potential 
changes in the definition could impact the scope of NTIA’s work, which could put 
unnecessary burdens on researchers, academia, and developers who are not developing 
technology that hits the level of “dual use foundation models with widely available, and the 
deployers of systems build on these models.” NTIA should also look to harmonize terminology 
with other industry efforts, such as the G7, AI Alliance, Frontier Model Forum, and academic 
and non-governmental standard development organizations. A consent lexicon is vital in 
creating an environment where all AI value chain stakeholders can understand and become 
familiar with the terminology.  
 
 
 
 
6 https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.14946.pdf 
7 https://crfm.stanford.edu/open-fms/ 
8 88 Fed. Reg. 75194 available at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/11/01/2023-24283/safe-
secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-intelligence.  
III. 
Risk & Risk Management  
 
The Chamber emphasizes that risk-management processes are still evolving, which is 
why we support the National Institutes of Standards and Technologies (NIST) work around the 
Risk Management Framework (RMF) and subsequent companion efforts to develop common 
standards to address and mitigate potential concerns. Additionally, we note that “risk” is 
contextual. As indicated in the NIST RMF 1.0, “Risk tolerance and the level of risk acceptable 
to organizations or society are highly contextual and application and use-case specific.”9 This 
is why we believe it is essential for NTIA to focus on the marginal risk, which is context-
specific.  
 
IV. 
Other Issues:  
 
The Chamber is concerned with NTIA asking if “risk” should be associated with 
floating-point operations per second (aka “FLOPs”), as using such criteria does not use the 
appropriate quantitative metrics based on benchmarks and evaluations.  
Finally, it is essential to emphasize that there can be valid reasons for some “artifacts,” 
such as code, datasets, and model weight, not to be released, as many corresponding factors 
may make releasing such information challenging.   
V. 
Conclusion  
 
Although we reiterate our concerns about this RFC’s short comment period, we look 
forward to working with NTIA and other stakeholders to address these matters and encourage 
NTIA to look for other opportunities to receive necessary feedback on the current request.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Michael Richards 
Senior Director  
Chamber Technology Engagement Center 
 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
 
9 NIST Risk Management Framework at 7 (January 2023) available at 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ai/NIST.AI.100-1.pdf  
