March 25, 2024
Dear National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
I am writing on behalf of Y Combinator to provide input on the critical issue of open-weight AI
models and their implications for innovation, competition, and national interests. As a key
stakeholder deeply engaged in the AI startup ecosystem, we believe it is essential to
thoughtfully consider the immense potential benefits of open models while proactively managing
associated challenges.
The degree of openness of AI models is a crucial factor shaping the trajectory of this
transformative technology. Highly open models, with weights accessible to a broad range of
developers, offer unparalleled opportunities to democratize AI capabilities and promote
innovation across domains. We have seen firsthand the incredible progress driven by open
models, with a growing number of startups harnessing these powerful tools to pioneer
groundbreaking applications.
Both open-weight AI models and closed-source models carry with them certain risks and
tradeoffs that must be carefully navigated. Open-weight models may have a heightened
potential for misuse, but they also allow for democratic contribution and oversight. Closed
models afford greater control and may mitigate certain dangers, but exacerbate others, including
the risks appurtenant to concentrating power among a few dominant players and weaker
defenses against adversarial attack, since the responsibility of identifying any pre-release
vulnerabilities, and then subsequently patching those vulnerabilities once discovered, falls solely
on the developer – potentially leading to slower fixes or a lack of transparency about the model's
security posture. The recent, well-documented issues with Gemini’s historical image generation
depictions offer a very low-stakes preview of how any deficiencies in closed-source models,
which are subject only to internal testing, may only be discovered once they are released into
the wild.1
We believe the benefits of openness ultimately outweigh the drawbacks. Given the extremely
broad user base and use cases of current and future AI models, it is nearly impossible to
identify all potential risks prior to launch. Open models foster transparency and accountability by
subjecting AI development to wider scrutiny and allow for broader societal input into their
1 See Google’s statement regarding Gemini here:
https://twitter.com/Google_Comms/status/1760354549481546035. “We’re aware that Gemini is offering
inaccuracies in some historical image generation depictions ... We’re working to improve these kinds of
depictions immediately. Gemini’s AI image generation does generate a wide range of people. And that’s
generally a good thing because people around the world use it. But it’s missing the mark here.”
560 20th Street, San Francisco, CA 94107
development. Open-weight models and the robust open-source communities around them
enable independent auditing and research into model behaviors, which then leads to technical
interventions (i.e., interventions related to the model’s code base/model function/wrappers) that
complement regulatory oversight by the government. A balance of technical and regulatory
intervention will be a necessary tool for oversight of trustworthy AI models; without technical
intervention, given the quick pace of innovation, regulators will be playing a perpetual game of
catch-up.
Open models are also essential for unlocking the full potential of AI as a general-purpose
technology that can be adapted to countless use cases. They level the playing field, enabling
startups and researchers to build on the latest advances. This decentralized innovation is key to
maintaining global competitiveness and technological leadership. Imposing strict limits on the
openness of model weights at this early stage risks constraining innovation and ceding
competitive advantage to nations that embrace openness. Instead, policymakers should aim to
proactively shape the ecosystem around open models to maximize benefits and mitigate harms.
To fully realize the benefits of open models while mitigating harms, we believe the role of
government should be to provide thoughtful guidance and support rather than unduly restrictive
controls. This could entail:
1. Developing clear guidelines and best practices for responsible open model development and
deployment, created in consultation with academia, small- and medium-sized technology
companies, larger incumbent technology companies, and civil society.
2. Investing in research to better understand and manage potential risks, including work on
model interpretability, robustness, and security.
3. Spurring development of tools and frameworks for responsible open model use, such as
privacy-preserving techniques, content filters, and monitoring systems for misuse.
4. Leading multi-stakeholder efforts to establish norms and standards around open model
development to uphold key values and protect national interests.
Y Combinator stands ready to work with NTIA and all stakeholders to realize the immense
promise of open-weight AI models while ensuring this technology develops in alignment with our
values. With foresight and proactive stewardship, we can harness open models as an incredible
tool to finally chip away at some of the world's most intractable challenges.
Thank you for considering our perspective on this pivotal issue.
Sincerely,
Garry Tan
President and CEO
Y Combinator
560 20th Street, San Francisco, CA 94107
